Countries targeted by Silent Librarian phishing attacks.

Looking at the list of university targets, it is clear that they are not randomly selected. All of the universities targeted in the Silent Librarian campaigns are generally prominent research, technical, or medical universities. Some schools in particular have been targeted numerous times over the past four-and-a-half years. For example, Monash University, located in Australia, has been a popular Silent Librarian target. The university has been targeted more than two dozen times by the group since the beginning of 2017. In addition to universities, Silent Librarian has also targeted non-academic institutions, such as Los Alamos National Laboratory, Electric Power Research Institute, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, Ohio State Wexner Medical Center, and Thomson Reuters.

One of the notable aspects of Silent Librarian phishing campaigns is that their tactics have barely changed over time. Outside the correction of a few minor spelling errors, the content of the phishing lures has remained incredibly consistent. The likely reason for this consistency is that the success rate of campaigns using these lures was high enough that there was no need for them to evolve. From a research perspective, though, the static nature of the group’s lure made it easier for us to identify past campaigns and track new campaigns as they occurred.

Body of an email lure sent to an Australian university in October 2017.

Overall, the lures constructed by Silent Librarian are remarkably authentic-looking. Spelling and grammar, two of the primary indicators of a malicious email, are nearly perfect. The message in the lures are contextually legitimate, meaning it is an email a recipient could be reasonably expected to receive.

Most of the Silent Librarian lure emails contain spoofed sender email addresses, which make them appear as if they’re coming from a legitimate source. Some of the phishing emails, though, have been sent from temporary Gmail addresses. A small number of lures have even been sent from what appear to be email accounts at various Turkish universities.

Example lure sent from a temporary Gmail account.

Each of the Silent Librarian lures ends with a very realistic looking closing signature containing contact information for the target library. This information is collected through open source research conducted by the threat actors. In some cases, all of the contact information can be found together on one webpage; however, some of the information is in different locations, indicating the actors are likely performing manual reconnaissance to gather the information.

At least a third of the Silent Librarian lures identified use fictitious personas to add a sense of authenticity to the emails. The names of these personas have evolved over time; however, the group has used the personas “Sarah Miller” and “Susan Jackson” frequently in recent campaigns. The group also changes the names of the personas to match the location of the target university. For example, a recent campaign targeting an Australian university used the persona “Jonathon Dixon,” while the persona identity “Shinsuke Hamada” was previously used in an email lure targeting a Japanese school.

Example lure containing “Sarah Miller” persona sent from a Turkish university email account.

Like the overall content of their lures, the subject lines of Silent Librarian phishing emails have remained consistent over time. Since the beginning of 2017, 97 percent of lures contained the subject “Library Account,” “Library Notifications,” or “Library Services.” Sometimes the name of the target university has been appended to the subject to add more perceived authenticity to the attack vector.

Phishing Pages

We have identified 127 different domains used to host Silent Librarian phishing sites since 2013. Like a growing number of phishing sites, domains registered by Silent Librarian generally use Freenom top-level domains (TLDs) (.TK, . CF, .GA, .GQ, .ML) because they are available at no cost. The group has used domains on other TLDs, though rather sparingly. Some of the other recent TLDs associated with Silent Librarian domains include .IN, .IR, .INFO, .LINK, and .TOP.

Like their lures, the phishing sites crafted by Silent Librarian are very realistic. The URLs associated with the phishing pages closely mirror the full legitimate URL path of the account login page for the target university library.

Legitimate American University Library Login URL (above)

Silent Librarian Phishing URL (January 2018)

The content of Silent Librarian phishing pages is almost identical to the legitimate target sites. The actors likely scrape the original HTML source code from the legitimate library login page, then edit the references to resources used to render the webpage (images, JavaScript, CSS, etc.) to point back to the original page, a common tactic among phishers.

Side-by-side comparison of a legitimate login page (left) and a phishing page (right).

At the beginning of 2017, Silent Librarian began to regularly obtain free Let’s Encrypt SSL certificates for their phishing pages. This technique, which we have previous discussed at length in blog posts from November and December, is used to create more realistic-looking phishing pages.

Example phishing page with valid SSL certificate.

For a few of the Silent Librarian attacks, we identified and collected the phish kits that were used to construct the phishing sites and left on the malicious server. Phish kits contain all of the files necessary to stand up a phishing site quickly, such as HTML files, PHP mailing scripts, and other resources (image files, JavaScript, CSS, etc.). Because these kits are essentially the “recipe” of how a phishing site is created, they can provide valuable intelligence into the back-end functionality of the site. One of the best pieces of evidence that can be collected from a phish kit is the PHP mailing script, which contains the location where compromised information is sent, usually an email address. An analysis of the Silent Librarian kits identified two email accounts that were used to receive compromised victim credentials. One was a Gmail email address and the other was an email address with Vatanmail, an Iranian email service provider.

Silent Librarian PHP mailer referencing a Vatanmail drop email account.

What Happens to the Stolen Credentials?

As outlined in Friday’s indictment, in addition to being passed to the IRGC, some of the stolen credentials were also sold on two Iranian websites, Megapaper[.]ir and Gigapaper[.]ir. Similarly, the credentials stolen in the Silent Librarian phishing attacks we identified were sold on an Iranian website; however, it is not one of the sites specified in the indictment.

Using a combination of technical and open source research, we identified another website, Uniaccount[.]ir, that was used to sell the credentials compromised in the Silent Librarian phishing attacks. The Uniaccount website is likely run by Mostafa Sadeghi, who was named in the recent indictment as a “prolific Iran-based computer hacker who was an affiliate of the Mabna Institute.”

Uniaccount home page.

On the Uniaccount website, credentials are offered for dozens of universities around the world. Visitors are asked to send an email to a specified Gmail address to request the price of a password for a specific university. Notably, the website also mentions that all accounts that are purchased have a one-month warranty, so if the account is cut off during that period, the purchaser will be given a new account to use.

In addition to buying an account for a specific university, a visitor on Uniaccount can also simply purchase research journal articles individually. The cost of a single article on Uniaccount is 2,000 Tomans, or approximately 60 U.S. cents. Ebooks and standards documents are also advertised for sale on the site.

PhishLabs continues to collaborate with universities, law enforcement, and ISAC partners as we discover more information about this group.

{{cta(‘f8eb51c1-9d02-44f3-9779-6d6b6fb519cf’,’justifycenter’)}}

Additional Resources: