The lures used in an older campaign from April 2021 impersonated the Federal Board of Revenue. There were minor differences in tools, tactics, and procedures: the malicious document was directly attached to the spear phishing email — still encrypted — and the decryption password was sent in a different email. The first stage was also hidden in the “Comments” section. However, the second stage contained the final payload, which was once again a file stealer with the exact same structure (a .NET DLL). Instead of exfiltrating the files through PHP scripts, they were done via FTP server.

It should be noted that in some occasions, the threat actor sent spear-phishing emails from the domain name mailerservice[.]directory which we attributed to the Patchwork threat actor in previous research. We disclosed multiple links between Patchwork and Confucius threat actors in the past, so this came as no surprise to us.

The creative use of social engineering lures and how to defend against them

In our previous research, we already found Confucius, which is known for targeting Pakistan military for espionage purposes, employing multiple file stealers. While the code quality of its payloads is not of the highest standard, this threat actor uses innovative techniques when crafting its malicious documents, such as hiding malicious code in the comments section, or using encrypted documents to prevent automatic analysis. Therefore, it’s highly likely that Confucius will continue to experiment and try out different kinds of social engineering lures in future campaigns.

Despite the variety of lures used by the threat actor, best security practices still apply to these attacks. Users should always be wary and avoid clicking on any link or downloading any file from unsolicited emails or suspicious sources. Red flags such as unusual sender domains or grammatical and spelling errors are also a sign that the email is malicious in nature, or at the very least, should be approached with proper security protocols in mind.

The following security solutions can also protect users from email-based attacks:

Trend Micro™ Cloud App Security – Enhances the security of Microsoft Office 365 and other cloud services via computer vision and real-time scanning. It also protects organizations from email-based threats.

– Enhances the security of Microsoft Office 365 and other cloud services via computer vision and real-time scanning. It also protects organizations from email-based threats. Trend Micro™ Deep Discovery™ Email Inspector – Defends users through a combination of real-time scanning and advanced analysis techniques for known and unknown attacks.

– Defends users through a combination of real-time scanning and advanced analysis techniques for known and unknown attacks.

Indicators of Compromise