One of the most significant developments in cyber espionage in recent years has been the number of groups adopting “living off the land” tactics. That’s our shorthand for the use of operating system features or legitimate network administration tools to compromise victims’ networks. The purpose of living off the land is twofold. By using such features and tools, attackers are hoping to blend in on the victim’s network and hide their activity in a sea of legitimate processes. Secondly, even if malicious activity involving these tools is detected, it can make it harder to attribute attacks. If everyone is using similar tools, it’s more difficult to distinguish one group from another. Most attack groups do still create and leverage custom malware, but it tends to be employed sparingly, reducing the risk of discovery.

Finding the needle in the haystack

This doesn’t mean espionage attacks are now going undiscovered, but it does mean that they can take longer for analysts to investigate. This is one of the reasons why Symantec created Targeted Attack Analytics (TAA), which takes tools and capabilities that we’ve developed for our own analysts and makes them available to our Advanced Threat Protection (ATP) customers. TAA leverages advanced artificial intelligence and machine learning that combs through Symantec’s data lake of telemetry in order to spot patterns associated with targeted attacks. Its advanced AI automates what previously would have taken thousands of hours of analyst time. This makes it far easier for us, and for our customers, to find that “needle in the haystack.”

It was TAA that led us to the latest cyber espionage campaign we’ve uncovered. Back in January 2018, TAA triggered an alert at a large telecoms operator in Southeast Asia. An attacker was using PsExec to move laterally between computers on the company’s network. PsExec is a Microsoft Sysinternals tool for executing processes on other systems and is one of the most frequently seen legitimate pieces of software used by attackers attempting to live off the land. However, it’s also widely used for legitimate purposes, meaning malicious use of PsExec can be difficult to spot.

TAA not only flagged this malicious use of PsExec, it also told us what the attackers were using it for. They were attempting to remotely install a previously unknown piece of malware (Infostealer.Catchamas) on computers within the victim’s network.