A defender who finds a simple remote access trojan (RAT) in the network won’t immediately think it was from an advanced persistent threat (APT) actor. Likewise, brute force attacks on internet-facing services like email, Microsoft Autodiscover, SMB, LDAP, and SQL are so common that they may seem like background noise that can be ignored. But in 2020, the notorious APT actor Pawn Storm used exactly these non-sophisticated attack methods to such an extent that their attacks may get lost in the noise.

In 2020 Pawn Storm spread simple Google Drive and IMAP Remote Access Trojans (RATs) to attack their usual targets, such as ministries of foreign affairs, embassies, the defense industry and the military. The RATs were also sent to a wider net of targets including various industries around the world. The group also performed widespread brute force attacks to steal credentials such as those of corporate email accounts, as evidenced by network probes we attribute to Pawn Storm and the loose way the actor abused compromised email accounts in malware and in sending spear-phishing emails. Pawn Storm even hardcoded compromised military and government-related email addresses in their IMAP RAT malware to communicate with victims’ computers. Recently, Norwegian authorities announced that Pawn Storm hacked the Norwegian parliament through brute force attacks.

As shown in incremental improvements, subsequent versions of the malware hint towards a learning curve of the malware author that is more typical for an inexperienced actor than for an advanced actor. First, the RATs were so simple that they did not even take into account international keyboards. This means it would be difficult for the attacker to enumerate the victims’ hard drives with files and folders that contain international characters. This mistake was corrected swiftly, but it shows the relative inexperience of this particular Pawn Storm operator. Later versions of the RAT malware started to use encryption, which could have been added right from the start. The only secondary payload we observed was a simple keylogger that stores stolen information locally on the victims’ machines.

Attribution to Pawn Storm of these malware samples would be difficult with only the samples at hand. Typically, a network defender would not attribute this kind of malware to an APT actor at all. However, we have solid attribution for these samples based on our long-term monitoring of Pawn Storm’s activities.



Recap of recent Pawn Storm activities

Compromising accounts of users from the Middle East

Trend Micro has been closely and consistently monitoring the activities of Pawn Storm, and in March 2020, we released our latest research on the group. In the aforementioned research paper, we shared that Pawn Storm heavily abuses compromised accounts — mainly in the Middle East — to send spear-phishing emails. The abuse of compromised email accounts in the Middle East continued in 2020. For example, in early December 2020 the group used a VPN service to connect to a compromised cloud server, then used the cloud server to connect to a commercial business email service provider. The group then logged in to a compromised email account of a chicken farm in Oman, and then sent out credential phishing spam messages to high-profile targets around the world. This shows that Pawn Storm is careful at obfuscating their tracks on multiple levels.

The abuse of various compromised email accounts in the Middle East started in May 2019 and continues today. Since August 2020, they didn’t use these email addresses to only send spear-phishing emails, but also as a way to communicate with compromised systems in IMAP RATs.

Brute force attacks

We think that Pawn Storm compromises lots of email accounts through brute force attacks on internet-facing services like email, LDAP, Microsoft Autodiscover, SMB, and SQL. For example, in May 2020, Pawn Storm scanned IP addresses worldwide, including IP addresses from the defense industry in Europe, on TCP port 445 and 1433, likely in an attempt to find vulnerable SMB and SQL servers or brute force credentials. In August 2020, Pawn Storm also sent UDP probes to LDAP servers around the world from one of their dedicated IP addresses.

In 2020, Pawn Storm often tries to obfuscate these brute force attempts by routing their attack traffic over Tor and VPN servers. Yet this is not always enough to hide these activities. In a Microsoft article about brute-forcing Office365 credentials over Tor, Microsoft attributed the activities to Strontium, which is another name for Pawn Storm. We wrote about related attacks in early 2020. These brute force attacks started in 2019, and then we could firmly attribute them to Pawn Storm because we could cross-relate the extensive probing of Microsoft Autodiscover servers around the world with high-confidence indicators of the group’s more traditional attack methods (spear phishing and credential phishing).

To illustrate the simplicity of the malware in Pawn Storm’s recent spear-phishing attacks, we describe one example below:

Technical analysis of Google Drive RAT